the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
coreware at
ocw.mit.edu so so far we've seen things
about vectors equations of planes
motions in space and so on basically
we've done geometry in space
but calculus really is about studying
functions so now we're going to actually
move on to studying functions of several
variables
so this new unit that what we'll do over
the next three weeks or so will be about
functions of several variables and their
derivatives okay
so first of all we should try to figure
out how we are going to think about
functions so remember if you have a
function of one
variable that means you know you have a
quantity that depends on one parameter
maybe F depends on a variable X and for
example you know the function that you
all know is f of xal sin
x and the way we would represent that is
using Maybe by plotting the graph of a
function so the graph of a function we
plot y = f
ofx
and in the case of a sign
function that looks like
this okay so
now let's say that we have actually a
function of two
variables so that means that the value
of f depends actually on two different
parameters say maybe variables are X and
Y or they could have any names you
want okay
so given values of the two parameters X
and Y the function will give will give
us a
number that we call f of x y that
depends on X and Y According to some
formula okay not very surprising so far
so
for
example you know I can give you the
function f of x y = X2 +
y^2 and of course as with functions of
one variable we don't need things to be
defined everywhere sometimes there's a
domain of definition so this one is
defined all the time but if I tell you
say f of x yal = square root of Y well
this is only
defined if Y is non- negative or if I
tell
you f of x y = 1 / x + y well that's
only defined if x + y is not zero and so
on okay now so these are you know meth
IAL examples given by explicit
formulas and of course there's physical
examples or examples coming from real
life for example you can look at you
know the
temperature at a certain point on the
surface of the Earth so you use maybe
longitude latitude that's X and Y and
then you have f of x y equals the
temperature at that
point
or in fact because temperature depends
also maybe on how high up you are it
depends on elevation so it's actually a
function of maybe
XYZ and it also depends on time so in
fact maybe it's a function of t for time
XYZ coordinates in space so you see that
real world function can depend on a lot
of variables so our goal will be to
understand how to deal with
that okay so now you'll see very soon
that actually it's already tricky enough
to picture a function of two variables
so we're going to focus on the case of
functions of two variables and then
we'll see that if we have more than two
variables then it's harder to plot the
function we cannot draw what the graph
looks like anymore but the tools are the
same the notion of partial derivatives
gradient vector and so on all the tools
that we will develop work exactly the
same way no matter how many variables
you
have
so and say for
Simplicity will focus mostly on
two or sometimes three
variables but it works the same in any
number of
variables okay so the first question is
how do we visualize a function of two
variables
so the first thing we can do is try to
draw the graph of f so maybe I should
say F which is a function of two
variables so the first answer will be we
can try to look at
it graph and the idea is the same as
with one variable namely we look at all
the possible values of the parameters X
and Y and for each of them we plot a
point whose height is the value of a
function at these parameters so we'll
plot let's say Z equals f of x y and now
that will become actually a surface in
space okay so for each value of X and
Y here we have XY in the XY plane then
we'll plot the point in space at
position X Y and Z equals F of
XY okay and if we take all of these
points together they will give us some
surface that sits in
space
yes oh a function of two
variables short hand well let's say how
to visualize a function of two variables
if you
want
okay so how do we do that concretely say
that I give you a formula for f how do
we try to represent
it
so let's do our first example let's say
that I give you the function f of x y
equal
y
okay so I it looks a little bit silly
because it doesn't depend on X but
that's not a problem it's still a valid
function of X and
Y just happens to be constant with
respect to X so to draw the
graph we look at the surface in space
defined by zal minus y what kind of
surface is
that it's a plane okay and if we want to
draw
it
equals minus y will look well that's the
y axis that's the x axis that's the
z-axis if I look at what happens in the
YZ plane in the plane of a Blackboard it
will just look like a line that goes
downward with slope one okay so it will
do
this and what happens if I change X well
if I change X nothing happens because X
doesn't appear in this equation so in
fact if instead of setting x equal to
zero I set xal to one I'm in front of
the Blackboard or minus one at the back
well it still looks exactly the same so
I have these I have this plane that
actually contains the
x-axis and slopes downwards with slope
one it's kind of hard to draw um now you
see immediately what the big problem
with graphs will be that these pictures
are hard to
read
but so that's our first
graph okay any questions so
far okay so let's say that we
have a slightly more complicated
function how do we see it so let's do
another
example let's say I give you f ofx y
equals 1 - x^2 - y^
2 so we should try to to
picture what the surface Z = 1 - - y
sare looks
like so how do we do that well maybe
you're actually you know very fast and
you've already figured out what it looks
like but if not then we need to work you
know piece by
piece so maybe it will help if we
understand first what it does in the
plane of a Blackboard
okay
so if we look at it in the YZ
plane that means we set x equal to
Z and then Z becomes 1 - y^2 what is
that it's a parabola pointing downward
and starting at one
okay so we should draw maybe this
downward
parabola
starts at one and it cuts the y axis
at one okay when Y is one that gives us
zero what do we see let's you know so we
might have an idea of what it might look
like or maybe not let's get more
slices let's see what it does in the XZ
plane this other vertical plane that's
coming toward
us
so in the XZ plane me we set y equal to
Z and we get Z = 1 - x^2 it's again a
parabola coming
downward okay so I'm going to try to
draw a
parabola that goes downward but now to
the front and to the
back so we are starting to have a
slightly better idea but we still don't
know whether the cross-section of this
thing might be you know round Square uh
something else so if we want more
confirmation we might want to also
figure out
maybe where does this surface intersect
the XY
plane so we hit the XY plane when Z
equals
z that means 1 - x^2 - y^ 2 should
Z that becomes X2 + Y2 = 1 that is a
circle of radius
1 that's the unit
circle so that means that here we
actually
have the unit circle and now you should
imagine that you have this thing that
when you slice it by a vertical plane
looks like a downward Parabola and it's
actually a surface of Revolution you can
rotate it around the
z-axis okay now if you stare long enough
at that equation you'll actually see
that Yes actually a posterior we know
that it had to be like that but see so
these are useful ways of trying to guess
what the graph looks like of course the
other way is to just ask your computer
to do it and then you know you'll get
that kind of
formula okay
well I can leave it on if you want
but uh no because I ploted a different
function that I will show you
later so it goes this way uh I mean if
you want one minus I mean it's really
going downward yes I agree that the
sheet is upside down but that's because
I plotted something
else
okay so in fact well let me yeah so what
I ploted in my computer was actually x2+
y^2 that looks like that see it's the
same with a parabola going
upward uh if you want to see more
examples I have various examples to show
well here's the graph of a function y^2
minus X2 see so that one is kind of
interesting it looks like a saddle uh if
you look at it in the YZ plane then it's
a parabola going up =
y^2 and
that's what we see to the left and to
the right but if you put it in the XZ
plane then it's a parab downwards zal
minus
x^2
so we have a parabola going downward in
One Direction upward in the other one
and together they form this
surface and of course you can plot you
know much more complicated functions so
this one I well if you can read very
small things then you can see the
formula but it doesn't matter just to
show you that you know you can put the
formula into a computer and it will show
you a
picture
okay so that's pretty good
but I mean you can see that it can get a
bit cluttered because maybe there's
features that are hidden behind or maybe
we have trouble seeing if we don't have
a computer you know that looks very
readible but this is kind of hard to
visualize sometimes so there's another
way to plot functions of two
variables and that's called the Contour
plot so the Contour plot is a very
elegant elegant solution to the problem
that it's difficult to draw space
pictures on a sheet of paper or on a
Blackboard so instead let's try to
represent a function of two variables by
just a
map you know the same way that when you
walk around you have actually
geographical maps that fit on a piece of
paper that tell you about what the real
world looks
like so what a contour plot looks
like is something like this so it's an
XY plot and on it you have a bunch of
Curves and what the curves represent are
the
elevations on the graph so for example
this curve might correspond to all the
points where f ofx yal 1 and that curve
might be all the points where f = 2 and
F = 3 and so on okay so when you see
this kind of plot you're supposed to
think that the graph of a function is
you know somewhere sits in space above
that it's like a map telling you how how
high things are and you know what you
would want to do with a function really
is be able to tell quickly what's the
value at a given point well let's say
that I want to look at that point I know
that f is somewhere between one and two
you know actually it's much faster to
read than the graph on the graph I might
have to look carefully and then measure
things and so on here I can just read
the value of f by comparing with the
nearby
lines okay so let me
try to make that more precise so this
shows all the points so
so where F of XY equals some fixed
values some fixed
constants and these constants typically
are chosen at regular
intervals
so for example here I chose you know 1
two three and I could continue with Z
minus one and so
on so one way to think about
it how does this relate to the graph
well that's the same thing as
cutting maybe I should say with slice
the
graph by horizontal
planes so horizontal planes have
equations of the form Z equals some
constant Z equals 0 zal 1 zal 2 and so
on so maybe the graph of my
function will be some sort of blow out
there and if I slice it by the plane zal
1 then I will get the level
curve which
is the points where f of x y equals
1 and so that's called a level
curve of
f okay and so we repeat the process with
maybe Z equal 2 and we get another level
curve and so on and that's then we
squish them all on the map and that's
how we get the contol
plot okay so each of these lines you
know imagine that this is like some
mountain or something that you're hiking
on each of these lines tells you how you
could move to stay at a constant height
you know if you want to get to the other
side of a mountain but without ever
going up or down you just walk along
that path and it will get you there
without
effort so in fact if you have been
talking about hiking on mountains well
that's exactly what a topographical map
is about sorry so I need to zoom a
bit so a uh topographic map this one is
from the US Geological Survey um show
shows you basically all the level curves
of the altitude function on you know a
piece of land so you know that if you
walk along these curves you will stay at
the same height and you know that if you
walk towards oh these don't have numbers
here let me find a place with
numbers here there's a
500 in in the middle um so you know that
if you walk on the line that says 500
you stay always is at 500 m in elevation
if you walk towards the mountain that I
think is below it then you will go up
and so on so you can see for example
here there's a peak and while here
there's a valley with actually the river
in it and the altitudes go down and then
back up again on the other
side okay so that's an example of a
contour plot of a function of course we
don't have a formula for that function
uh but we have a contour plot and that's
what we need actually to understand
what's going on there
okay any
questions no okay so another example of
Contour plots well you've probably seen
various versions of these you know
temperature
Maps so that's supposed to be how warm
it is right
now um so you know this one is color
coded instead of having curves it has
all of these colors but the effect is
the same if you look at the separations
between consecutive colors these are the
level curves of a function that tells
you the temperature at a given
point okay so these are examples of
Contour plots in real
life okay um no
questions no okay so basically one of
the
goals that one should try to achieve at
this point is you know becoming familiar
with the plot the Contour plot sorry the
the Contour plot the graph and how to
view and deal with
functions
oh
uhoh
okay
so
Let's do an
example well let's do a couple of
examples so let's start with f ofx y
equals minus y I'm I'm going to take the
same two examples as there to start with
so that we you know we see really the
relation between the graph and the
Contour
plot
so let's try to plot
it so where's the level curve fals Z for
this one
well f is zero when Y is zero so that's
the x
axis okay so that's the level
zero where's the level one well f is one
when negative Y is
1 that means when Y is negative 1 so
I'll go to minus one and that will be
where my level one
is and so on F is 2 when Y is -2 f is -1
when Y is 1 and so
on okay is that convincing do you see
how we got
that okay let me do it again I don't see
anybody nodding so that's kind of bad
news um so if I want to know where's the
level curve say
one I try to set F equal to one let's do
this one
f = 1 means
that Y is 1 means that Y is minus one
and Y = minus one is this horizontal
line on this
chart okay and same with the others so
you can see on this map that the value
of a function doesn't depend on X if you
move parallel to the x- axis nothing
happens if you move in the y direction
it decreases at a constant rate that's
why the Contours are evenly spaced see
how how spaced apart they are tells you
actually how steep things
are so that corresponds exactly to that
picture except that here we draw X
coming to the front and Y to the right
so you have to rotate the map by 90 to
get to that it's an unfortunate
consequence of the usual way of plotting
things in
space okay so these horizontal lines
here correspond actually
to horizontal
lines
here
okay second example let's
do 1 - x^2 - y^
2 okay or maybe I'll reite it as one 1 -
X2 + y^ S it's really the same
thing
so X Y let's see where is this function
equal to
zero well we say f is zero on the unit
circle okay so the zero
level well let's say that this is my
unit
that's where it's
zero uh what about FAL
1 well that's when x + y^2 equals
z well that's only going to be here so
you know that's just a single
point what about FAL minus one
that's when X2 + y sare
equal 2 that's a circle of
radius root of two which is about 1.4 so
it's somewhere
here then minus so that's 1 minus 2
similarly will be x + y = 3 root of 3 is
about
1.7 and then minus 3 will be of radius
two and so on so what I want to show
here is that so that's minus three
that's minus two what I want to show
here is that they're getting closer and
closer apart okay so first it's
concentric circles that tells us that we
have a shape that's a solid of the graph
is going to be a surface of
Revolution things don't change if I
rotate and second the Contour the level
lines the level curves are getting
closer and closer to each other that
means it's getting steeper and steeper
because I have to travel a shorter
distance if I want my altitude to change
by
one okay so this stop here is kind of
flat and then it gets steeper and
steeper and that's what we observe on
that picture
there
okay so just to show you a few more
where did I put
my so for X2 + y^2 the Contour plot
looks like this maybe actually I'll make
it okay so it looks exactly the same as
this one but the difference is if you
can see the numbers which are not there
so you can see them uh then you would
know that instead of decreasing as we
move out this one is increasing as we go
out okay so that's where we use actually
the labels on the level curves that tell
us whether things are going up or
down but the Contour plot looks exactly
the
same for the next one I had I think was
y^
2 -
x^2 so the Contour plot well let me
actually zoom
out so the Contour plot looks like that
so the level curve corresponding to zero
is actually two diagonal lines and if
you look on the plot
say that you start at the Saddle Point
in the middle and you try to stay at the
same level so it looks like a mountain
pass right well there's actually four
directions from that point that you can
go staying at the same height and they
actually on the map they look exactly
like these two CR Crossing
Lines okay so these are things that go
on the side of the two mountains that
are to the left and right and stay at
the same height as the mountain pass on
the other hand if you go along the y
direction to the left or to the right
then you go towards positive values and
if you go along the x axis then you get
towards negative
values
okay uh the equation for the the
function was y^ sare -
x^2
okay so you can try to plot them by hand
and confirm that it does look like but I
trust I trust my
computer and finally this
one well so the Contour plot looks a bit
complicated but you can see two things
in the middle you can see these two
regions with these concentric circles
they're not really circles but you know
these closed curves that are concentric
and they correspond to the two
mountains and then at some point in the
middle we have a mountain M pass and
there we see the two Crossing Lines
again like on the plot of xus sorry y
sare - x
s and so at this settle Point here if we
go north or south then we'll go down on
either side to the valley and if we go
east or west then we'll go towards the
mountains we'll go
up okay does that make sense a little
bit okay so know reading plots is not
easy but hopefully we'll get used to it
very
soon okay so actually let's
say well okay so I want to point out one
thing the Contour plot tells us actually
what happens when we move when we change
X and
Y
so if
I change value of X and Y that means I'm
moving east west or north south on the
map and then I can ask myself does the
value of a function increase or decrease
in each of these
situations well that's the kind of thing
that the Contour plot can tell me very
quickly
so okay so say for example that I have a
piece of Contour
plot that looks you know like that maybe
this is FAL
1 and this is FAL 2 and here this is FAL
0 and let's say that I start at a
point say at this
point okay so here I have x0 y0 and the
question I might ask myself is if I
change X or Y how does f
change well the plot tells me
that if X
increases and I keep y
constant then what happens to F of
XY well it will increase because if I
move to the right then I go from one to
a value bigger than one I don't know
exactly how much but I know that
somewhere it's somewhere between one and
two it's more than
one if x decreases then F
decreases okay and similarly I can tell
that if y
increases then
F well looks like if I increase y then F
will also
increase and if y
decreases then F
decreases and you know that's the kind
of qualitative analysis that we can do
easily from the Contour plot but maybe
we'd like to actually be more size than
that and tell how fast f changes if I
change X or
Y okay so to find R of change that's
exactly where we use
derivatives
so we are going to have to deal with
partial derivatives so I will explain to
you soon why
partial
so let me just remind you first if you
have a function of one
variable then so let's say F ofx then
you have a derivative frime of x is also
called DF
DX and it's defined as a
limit when Delta X goes to zero
of the change in
F uh sorry it's not going to fit I need
to go to the next
line it's going to be the limit as Delta
X goes to zero of the rate of
change so the change in F between X and
X Plus Delta x divided by Delta X
sometimes you write Delta f for a change
in F divided by Delta X then you take
the limit of this rate of increase as
Delta X goes to zero now of course if
you have a formula for f then you know
at least you should know uh I suspect
most of you know how to actually take
the derivative of a function you know
from its
formula
so now how do we do that
oh sorry and I should tell you also what
this means on the graph so if I plot the
graph of a function and I have my point
x and here I
have F ofx how do I see the derivative
well I look at the
tangent line to the graph and the
slope of a tangent line is fime of
X
okay and truth in advertising not every
function has a derivative you have
functions that are not regular enough to
actually have a derivative so in this
class we're not going to actually worry
too much about differentiability but
it's good at least to be aware that you
can't always take a
derivative
so yes and what else do I want to remind
you of well we also have an
approximation formula
which says that you know if we
have the value of F at some point x0 and
then we want to find the value at a
nearby
point x close to x0 then our best guess
is that it's F of x0 plus the derivative
frime at x0 *
Delta X or if you want xus
x0 okay uh is this kind of familiar to
you yeah I mean maybe with different
notations maybe you called that Delta X
or something maybe you called that x0
plus H or something but it's it's the
usual approximation formula using the
derivative if you put more terms then
you get the theed tailor approximation
that I know that you guys don't like
so okay so the
question is how do we do the
same for a function of two variables f
of x
y
so the difficulty there is we can change
X or we can change y or we can change
both and presumably the manner in which
F changes will be different depending on
whether we change X or Y so that's
that's why we have several different
Notions of
derivative
so
okay so we have a
notation okay so this is a curly D and
it is not a straight D and it is not a
Delta it's a d that kind of curls
backwards like that and the way you read
this symbol is partial okay so it's it's
the special notation for partial
derivatives and essentially what it
means is we are going to do a derivative
where we care about only one variable at
a time that's why it's partial it's
missing the other
variables okay so a function of several
variables doesn't have a usual
derivative it has only partial
derivatives for each
variable so the partial
derivative DF partial F partial X at x0
y0 is
defined to be the limit when I take a
small change in X Delta X of the change
in
F divided by Delta X okay so here I'm
actually not changing Y at all I'm just
changing X and looking at the rate of
change with respect to
X and I have the same with respect to Y
partial F partial y is the limit so I
should say at a point x0 y0 is the limit
as Delta y tends to zero of so this time
I keep X the same but I change
y okay so that's the definition of a
partial
derivative and we say that a function is
differentiable if these things
exist okay so most of the functions
we'll see are differentiable and we'll
actually learn how to compute their
partial derivatives without having to do
this of course we'll just use the usual
methods for computing
derivatives so in fact I claim you
already know how
to take partial
derivatives so let's see what it means
geometrically
so
geometrically my function can be
represented by its
graph and you know I fix some point x0
y0 and then I'm going to ask myself what
happens if I change the value
of
well if I change the value of x
keeping y constant so if I keep y
constant and change X it means I'm
moving forward or backward parallel to
the x axis so that determines for me a
vertical
plane okay parallel to the XZ plane when
I fix y equals
constant and now if I slice the graph by
that I will get some
curve that go goes it's a slice of the
graph of
F and now what I want to find is how F
depends on X if I keep y constant that
means it's the rate of change if I move
along this curve so in fact if I look at
the slope of this
thing so if I draw the tangent line to
this slice then the
slope will be partial F over partial X
I think I have a better picture of that
somewhere yes here it
is okay that's the same picture just
with different
colors so I take the graph I slice it by
a vertical plane I get a curve and now I
take the slope of that curve and that
gives me the partial
derivative
and to finish let me just tell you how
sorry and I should say partial f paral y
is the same thing that's slicing Now by
a plane that goes in the YZ directions
okay so I fix I fix um x equals constant
that means I slice by a plane that's
parallel to the Blackboard I get a curve
and I look at the slope of that
curve okay so it's just a matter of
fting one variable setting it constant
and looking at the other one
only so how to compute these
things
well we
actually to find oh there's a piece of
notation I haven't told you yet so
another notation you will see I think
this is what one uses a lot in physics
and this is what one uses a lot in
applied math which is the same thing as
physics but with different
notations okay so there two different
notations partial F partial X or F
subscript X and they're the same thing
well we just treat y as a
constant and X as
variable and vice versa if we want to
find partial with respect to Y so let me
just finish with one quick
example let's say that I give you f of x
y = x Cub y + y^
2 then partial f paral
x well let's take the derivative so here
it's X Cub * a constant derivative of x
cubed is 3 *
x^2 * the constant Plus what's the
derivative of y^ 2 zero because it's a
constant if you do instead partial F
partial y then this is actually a
constant time y the Dera of Y is 1 so
that's just X cubed and the derivative
of y^ 2 is 2 y
okay so it's fairly easy you just have
to keep remembering which one is a
variable which one is
not okay
so more about this next time and we'll
also learn about Maxima and Minima in
several
variables